In this lecture, you're going to learn about IOS configuration management, and the running configuration,
and the startup configuration.
So, I'm going to mix some configuration commands to demonstrate this for you.
I'm going to go to global configuration, so I enter 'config t'. Notice right now that I've just got the default
set up in this example, where the hostname is Router. If I enter the command 'hostname Router1' and hit Enter,
you'll see that the hostname changes immediately.
So in IOS,
whenever you make a change, the change takes effect immediately.
When you make the change, it goes into the running configuration, which is the configuration that
is in effect right now.
But as well as having the running configuration, we've also got the startup configuration.
Running configuration is the configuration in effect right now. The startup configuration is the configuration that
will go into effect when the router is next started or rebooted. And commands that you entered in the
running configuration do not get saved permanently until you explicitly copy them from the running configuration
to the startup configuration.
You can see here I entered the command 'hostname Router1'. That went into the running configuration immediately,
and my hostname was immediately changed to Router1.
But if I now do a 'show startup-config', now I notice my not so deliberate mistake, I'm at global configuration,
so I can't enter a 'show' command.
I told you, you'd make that mistake a lot,
right?
I still make that mistake too. So I hit Ctrl+A, and make that a 'do show start',
and let's do Tab completion to check what the command should be.
So the full command is 'show startup-config',
I'll hit Enter, and notice here
that the hostname is still Router.
It hasn't changed to Router1. So in the startup configuration,
it's still hostname Router.
If I now do a 'do show running-config',
I can see in the running configuration that the hostname is Router1.
So if I now reloaded the router, it would come back, and the change would not have taken effect.
Now, this is actually deliberate because it allows you to back out of mistakes.
Say, if I made some changes on the router, and I made some catastrophic changes, but I hadn't saved it
yet.
The easiest thing to do is to just pull the power of the router and then plug it back in again.
Boot it up, and it will come back with the configuration
it was already on there before I'd made those changes.
Now, obviously, that's a fairly drastic thing to do.
It requires a reboot on the router.
So you would only do that as a, really, a last resort.
Okay, so I've changed the name of my router to Router1 in my running configuration.
I haven't copied it to the startup configuration yet, though,
so it's not going to be persistent across a reboot. To do that,
the command is 'copy run start', and again, I'm at the wrong command level.
So, I'll 'end' to drop back down to the enable prompt. To do your 'copy run start' command, you have to be
at the privilege exec mode. So, I can now do a 'copy run start'.
It will ask me the destination filename I want to save it to. Pretty much always,
we're going to accept the default here and just hit Enter.
It will take a few seconds to build the configuration, and I get the "OK" message telling me that, "Yes, it's
being copied to the startup configuration."
So if I now do my 'show startup-config' command again, you'll see that the hostname is now Router1 in
there as well.
So, it's permanent.
If I reboot the router now, it's going to come up with that as the configuration.
The next thing I want to show you is how to back up your configuration.
Now, Cisco do have tools like Cisco Prime Infrastructure that can be used to automate this
from a centralized server. That's not tested on the exam, by the way, but you can also back up manually
as well.
The way to do that is I'm going to copy the running configuration.
I'll hit the question mark '?' now to see where I can copy it to,
and you'll see one of the options here is flash, which is flash memory on the router.
So I can do a 'copy running-config' to 'flash', and I have to give it a file name
when I do this, so I enter a colon ':' and I'll call it 'my-config'.
Try to do it without a typo,
there we go.
It'll say, "What I want the destination filename to be?"
Yes, I want it to be called my-config, and I've now backed up my configuration to flash. To verify that,
I can try a 'show flash',
and there you see, I've got my configuration is in there.
If I wanted to restore from this backup, the way I do it is by copying it to the startup configuration
and then rebooting.
But when you do a copy, it's going to actually merge the commands rather than replace,
and typically, I would want to replace the entire startup configuration.
So the way I do that is, first off, I erase the startup configuration.
So I enter the command 'erase start', it's telling me an "Incomplete command." So, let's use the context
sensitive help. To help, we hit the up arrow, space, question mark '?',
and it tells me "Unrecognized command."
Okay, this is because I'm working on an older router here.
So in an older router, the command is 'write erase',
and that will tell me it's going to erase the NVRAM file system, which is where the startup configuration
is saved.
"Do I want to confirm?" I hit Enter to confirm that,
and that will erase my startup configuration.
I can now 'copy flash:my-config' to the startup configuration. Confirm that, and I would
now reboot the router to come back up with that configuration.
Now, hopefully, you're thinking it's not a very good idea to back up the configuration to flash on this router
because if the entire router blows up, I'll lose the router, and I'll lose my backup as well.
It's always a bad idea to back up a device to the same device.
You want to back it up somewhere else.
So, the easiest way to do that would be to copy the running configuration to a TFTP server.
So, I copy it on TFTP and hit Enter.
It will then ask me for the IP address of my TFTP server.
Let's say this is at 10.10.10.10,
I hit Enter. Then, the name of the filename I want to use,
let's say I'm going to use router1-config, and then I could enter today's date in here.
Let's say
that's the date and hit Enter. And it will then connect to the TFTP server and back up the configuration there
as a text file.
I'm getting an error message because I don't actually have a TFTP server in the lab here. While I'm saying
that it will show up as a text file,
another thing you might wonder is, "How do I check what the actual contents of my backup are?" If it's
safe to flash,
the way that you can do that is using the 'more' command.
So I would enter the command "more flash:my-config",
and that will print out here what the contents of that configuration file are.
The last thing that I need to tell you here is where the different configuration files are stored.
Now, for the device to boot up, it needs to initially load the IOS operating system image,
and that is stored in Flash.
Once the operating system is up and running, then it will load your actual administrator configuration
from the startup configuration, and the startup configuration is stored in NVRAM.
That's non-volatile memory,
so it's persistent
across a reboot. The running configuration is stored in normal memory, in RAM, and it's loaded into RAM
memory from the startup configuration when the device boots up.
Okay, that's it.
See you in the next lecture.